Before starting this code challenge, let me be very clear that the premise and the wildly speculative
interpretations of the results are a little silly and a little ridiculous.
Language models like GPT two do not actually have preferences, the way that humans and dogs and other
individuals have preferences, but the methods and the analyses that you will learn here are serious
and can be used to understand how targeted manipulations of the attention algorithm can causally reveal
downstream network interactions and language generation in language models.
Okay.
So with that disclaimer out of the way, this code challenge is designed to follow from the previous
code demo video.
In fact, you will use a lot of the code from the previous video to help you solve the exercises here.
There are four exercises in total, and they are all focused on silencing individual heads in individual
transformer blocks and measuring the resulting cosine similarity between token representations of pizza
with either peanut butter or pineapple.
So this is going to be a lot of fun.
So let's begin.
The goal of exercise one is to set up the experiment.
So import GPT two large, put it on the GPU and write a hook function that you implant in every layer.
This is very similar to the hook function that I introduced in the previous video.
Your hook function here should be able to silence, and by that I mean zero out one attention head and
one layer for one specific token.
Of course, those three indices will need to be defined as variables so that you can specify in the
experiment which head and which layer and which token index you want to replace the attention activations
with zero.
Next, tokenize this sentence that some Italians may find offensive.
Again, I promise this is just a joke.
Don't take this too seriously and don't be mad at me.
Next, you want to find the indices of the tokens for butter, pineapple, and pizza.
Now you need to know those token indices because in later exercises you will manipulate only those particular
indices.
And also you will calculate cosine similarity between specific pairs of tokens.
Interestingly, the word peanut butter gets split up into three tokens.
We explored this a little bit in the previous video about how we can get peanut to be actually represented
as a single token.
Turns out it can be a single token if it's space peanut with a lowercase p.
But anyway.
And as I discussed earlier in the course, when you have a multi token word, the best token to analyze
is the final one, because that already has all of the context from the previous tokens loaded onto
it.
Okay.
Anyway, move all of the tokens to the GPU so that we can do all the forward passes on the GPU.
Now this sequence is quite short, so it won't take a very long time to do a forward pass even on the
CPU.
But we will be doing many forward passes in the experiments in later exercises.
Okay.
So that's for exercise one.
I think you won't have too much difficulties here because a lot of this exercise can be solved by copy
pasting from the previous video.
I will now switch to code and show my solution, although only fairly briefly, mostly just to explain
the organization of the modified hook function.
Lots of libraries that we will use here.
Let's see.
Here is importing the model a GPT two large pushing it to the GPU.
And I'll yeah this you've seen before as well.
Okay.
So this hook is this hook function is basically the only thing I really want to discuss here.
It is nearly identical to the hook function in the previous video.
But I have added this key variable over here token to silence.
So that means that we are going to zero out.
We only the attention vectors for this particular head in this particular layer for this particular
token.
So it's even more targeted, even more precise of a manipulation compared to what we did in the previous
video.
Okay.
And the rest of this stuff I'm not going to discuss.
So I will run that cell.
And here's this.
This is also not new compared to the previous video.
This is new because yeah, here we need to know which uh, indices correspond to which target values.
So butter pineapple and pizza.
Again we will use these in later exercises as a way to grab the embeddings vectors for these different
tokens.
Now for exercise two.
We are not going to manipulate the model just yet.
Instead the goal here is to gather some baseline comparison data that we can use to evaluate the impact
of silencing attention heads in a later exercise.
So here you should do a forward pass with the tokens and no manipulations.
I'll put the hidden states during the forward pass, and then calculate the cosine similarity between
butter and pizza, and between pineapple and pizza for each layer in the model.
Each transformer block.
You can then make a scatter plot that looks like this, where you see the transformer block on the x
axis and cosine similarity on the y axis, and the two markers here correspond to the cosine similarity
for the token butter with the token pizza and the token pineapple with the token pizza.
Now, once you have these data, you can make very strong conclusions about whether GPT two prefers
peanut butter or pineapple on its pizza.
Needless to say, I'm just kidding.
This analysis does not reveal GPT preference for bizarre ingredients on pizza.
It does, however, reveal something about language and the training set.
In fact, I would like you to think about what is the appropriate conclusion to draw from whatever pattern
of results you find here.
I will discuss that appropriate interpretation and also the silly interpretation.
But first you should pause the video and write code to implement this exercise.
And now I will switch to code again.
Setting these variables to really high values well beyond the range of the number of layers we actually
have.
It's just a way of turning off the toggle so that no manipulations are actually run.
And that gives us the clean version of the output.
And we want all of the hidden states here.
Okay.
And here we can check the size.
So we have one sequence in the batch nine tokens, 1280 embeddings dimensions in GPT two large.
Here is where I'm getting the cosine similarity.
Uh, here I'm using the PyTorch function f cosine similarity.
You can see in different videos I calculate cosine similarity in different ways.
I find if the data are already in PyTorch formats are already torch tensors.
Uh, and you're only calculating cosine similarity between two specific vectors, then I think it's
easier to use this cosine similarity function.
On the other hand, when I want to calculate an entire cosine similarity matrix for lots of variables,
then I find this function to be clunky and awkward, and I prefer just to write it out myself.
I find that easier anyway.
You do whatever you like.
Okay, so cosine similarity between, uh, out clean.
So the output from the clean version of the model.
No manipulations, hidden states layer I plus one.
Of course the plus one is because the very first layer is the output of the embeddings layer.
And we're only interested here in the transformer blocks.
And then I get all of these sequences which is actually just one the token for butter coming from peanut
butter.
All of the embeddings dimension.
That's the first thing I want to calculate cosine similarity with.
And it is calculated with the vector for pizza.
And then here I have zero.
Now you might think that this is redundant but it kind of is.
But it's actually just to preserve the dimensionality because f cosine similarity is really Particular
about the dimensionality of these inputs.
Anyway, here I'm using dot item just to pick out the one value from the rest of the PyTorch variable.
Okay, so we get two cosine similarity values between peanut butter and pizza and between pineapple
and pizza.
So that is the analysis code.
It is very fast.
And here is where I'm visualizing the data.
So these are this is for peanut butter and this is for pineapple.
And here we see the results.
So at almost every single layer maybe a couple of exceptions here but pretty much everywhere inside
the model.
The cosine similarity between pineapple and pizza is stronger than it is between butter and pizza.
So what does that tell us?
That tells us, beyond any reasonable doubt, that GPT two thinks that pineapple on pizza is a fantastic
idea.
Okay, I'm just kidding.
That is absolutely not at all what these data show.
What these data really do show is that in text that this model has been trained on, which is basically
much of the internet.
Uh, the words pineapple and pizza appear more often together compared to the words butter and pizza.
And it's not only butter, it is butter with the context peanut butter.
So, uh, it's basically like butter modulated by the word peanut to pull it in the direction of the
semantic concept of peanut butter.
Okay.
So basically all around the internet, people talk about pineapple and pizza more often than they talk
about peanut butter and pizza.
And that's basically what this, uh, difference here reflects.
Also notice, uh, yeah, there's like qualitatively different things happening at the very beginning
and at the very end of the model, as you know, the very, very last transformer block is a bit special
because that is the model's last opportunity to adjust the vectors before it goes through the UN embeddings
matrix, and also with the hugging face models.
If you export the hidden states, then this actually also includes the layered normalization.
Now it's not immediately it's not trivial that just adding layernorm would really change the cosine
similarity, considering that layernorm is not applied differently to different tokens, so it's applied
uniformly to all the token representations.
I know I've said this before, but as an experimental scientist, it is important to me that you understand
that the title of this exercise is just a bit of humor.
That said, this is a serious analysis that we are going to run here in a for loop over all of the layers
in the model.
So all the transformer blocks silence.
Attention head number five.
So that's index five, which means the sixths attention head only at the token corresponding to pineapple.
And then repeat the cosine similarity analysis from exercise two.
That will be what you plot in this scatter plot.
Over here on the left.
Again, it's exactly the same analysis as in the previous exercise, except that at each layer you will
just ablate head number five and only in that layer.
And just for the token corresponding to pineapple.
The goal of this analysis is to see whether we can manipulate the cosine similarity between the token
embeddings vector for pineapple with the embeddings vector for pizza.
And the idea is that the attention heads are calculating the relevant context across the different tokens.
And so if that is the case, then we might expect that the cosine similarity would decrease when we
inhibit the ability of the attention calculation to fully transmit that contextual information.
Of course, we are not completely blocking the transmission of that calculation, because we are only
silencing one attention head and not all of them.
Now, there's no particular reason why I picked attention head number five to be the one that gets silenced.
It's just to make things easy for this exercise.
I will get back to that in the next exercise.
Anyway, so how do you know if the silencing of this one attention head for this one token really has
an impact?
To assess that impact, we can compare these results against the results from exercise two, where we
used a clean version of the model.
And that's what you will plot over here on the right.
So this is the difference in cosine similarity between the silenced and the clean version of the model.
And I'm plotting this for both of the token pairs.
Now if silencing the attention head has absolutely no effect whatsoever, then you would expect all
of these difference values to be exactly zero.
And what we are going to interpret is whether they are zeros or not.
And if not, what is the sign.
So whether silencing this attention head decreased or increased the cosine similarity.
All right I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
Now you should pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code, show my solution, and also have a discussion about the appropriate
and also the humorously inappropriate conclusions that we can draw from these results.
The code in this cell here is nearly identical to the code from exercise two.
So loop over all of the layers.
Uh, run a forward pass through the model and calculate cosine similarity for each of the hidden states.
Each of the transformer block outputs for peanut butter and pizza, and for pineapple and pizza.
The difference compared to exercise two is basically just these two variable names.
So token to silence is now pineapple index.
So the index of the word pineapple in the text.
And I've set head to silence to be five.
So we are just going to zero out the attention vectors from one attention head.
And this also has a different variable name, but otherwise it's basically the same thing.
Okay, so that all went pretty fast.
And now the plotting here is also not that exciting to talk about.
Mostly similar to the previous exercise.
In fact, this is exactly the code from the previous exercise, except this is for the silencing.
And in exercise two, of course there was no silencing.
Now visually just you know, if you like, squint your eyes and look through your eyelashes.
You don't really see any obvious differences here.
When we calculate the explicit differences here.
And so just to be clear, what I'm plotting here, that is the difference between this plot here where
we silenced one attention head in each layer versus this result here from exercise two where we didn't
silence anything anywhere.
So the difference between those two plots, that is what I'm showing here on the y axis.
So some interesting patterns to observe here.
First of all, it's very noticeable that the peanut butter result didn't change at all.
So the cosine similarity between peanut butter and pizza did not change.
Maybe if you look really closely there were some really really small.
But let's just say that zero okay.
So that didn't change at all.
That is not very surprising because we did not actually change the token corresponding to the peanut
butter index.
So if you like you can try that.
It's very simple.
You just change this to butter index instead of pineapple index okay.
But then of course the key result here is to see whether we get any non-zero and also any consistent
patterns of results when we interfere with the token for pineapple.
And on the one hand, we do see that it gets pushed off of zero.
So it seems like silencing that one head for this one token position really did have an impact, but
it's a quite a subtle impact, right?
These difference values are two orders of magnitude smaller than the overall cosine similarities.
So the effect was really small and not really consistent.
So it's not like they were all consistently negative or all consistently positive.
They kind of seem to be all over the place.
So what can we interpret here.
Let me first tell you the the humorous interpretation, which is that we completely failed to disrupt
GPT two's preference for pineapple on pizza.
And that means that GPT two just loves pineapple on pizza so much that even when we go in and manipulate
the GPT two Brain.
We still cannot break its love of pineapple on pizza.
Okay, I'm just kidding.
Please forgive me.
Italian audiences.
Uh, anyway.
Okay, now, the real interpretation is that there's no real convincing evidence that our manipulation
did anything consistent across the different blocks.
On the other hand, it did numerically have an impact, which is nice to see because that's kind of
a manipulation check.
So we tweaked something in the model.
It was a very, very small, very precise manipulation that we performed.
It had some impact in a numerical sense.
It changed the numerical values, but it's not really anything that we can convincingly make any interpretation
of.
Now for exercise four.
This is a follow up to exercise three, where you only manipulated one of the heads.
So what you want to do here in exercise four is copy that for loop over the layers and then add another
embedded for loop over all of the attention heads.
So now you are going to zero out every individual head in every layer.
Of course you only do this once.
So at any given forward pass there is exactly one attention head in exactly one layer that is silenced
for exactly one token, and all the rest of them are functioning normally.
So very precise, very limited manipulation.
And then you calculate cosine similarity, just as you did before.
Now for this visualization here on the left, you can draw all of the individual heads that you silenced
as individual circles.
And this horizontal black line here I hope you can see this on the video screen.
It's a little small, but there's a horizontal black line here that corresponds to the cosine similarity
for the clean model.
Of course, there's only one of those data points per layer, because there's no manipulation of the
attention heads with the clean version.
So just to be make sure this is clear.
So now for each transformer block we have a collection of data points for the different heads.
This corresponds to the cosine similarity between pineapple and pizza for manipulating or silencing
each one of the heads in each layer.
And for this exercise, you can just focus on the cosine similarity between pineapple and pizza.
You don't have to worry about peanut butter and pizza for this exercise.
Next, what I want you to do is run a t test on these cosine similarity values to determine whether
they are different from the clean value of cosine similarity.
In other words, you can implement this by subtracting the results from the clean model from the results
for all of these ablated models.
Now, if knocking out these heads has a consistent impact on cosine similarity, then you should get
a significant t test here.
So you get one t test per layer.
And then in this plot over here, I have drawn the difference scores as triangles where there is a significant
difference.
And I've drawn them as little red x's where the p value was greater than 0.05.
Of course you don't see any of those markers here, but you will see them when you run your code.
So this is the final exercise for this code challenge.
You can now pause the video and wrap things up.
And now I will switch to code discuss my code solution and also the results and how to interpret them.
This main code cell here in exercise four again looks really, really similar to the code cell from
exercise two and also from exercise three.
So it's similar in the sense that I have a for loop over layers.
Uh, and then I'm running a forward pass to manipulate one head and then calculating cosine similarities
between the embeddings vectors from uh, peanut butter to pizza and pineapple to pizza.
Now, in this exercise, at least in the visualization, I am not using the peanut butter pizza cosine
similarities, but I left it in here.
Just, uh, I don't know, for no particularly good reason.
Uh, you can play around with that if you like.
Okay, so what is different here compared to exercise three?
For one thing, uh, well, this is also the same.
It's redefined here, Just in case you were playing around with exercise three and change this to butter.
So now we make sure that we reset this to the value that we want.
Okay.
So what is different here is that in exercise three I had code here that was head to head to silence
equals five.
But now I no longer have that variable fixed to a particular value because that gets defined in this
for loop over here.
So this is an embedded for loop.
We're looping over the layers.
And then we have another for loop over all of the individual attention heads within each layer.
So this is a lot of forward passes to go through.
So it's however many layers.
There are times however many heads there are.
Okay.
But otherwise the code is basically the same.
And on the CPU, I don't know how long this will take.
Maybe several minutes on the CPU and on the GPU, it's pretty fast.
It's like 20s or something.
Okay.
And then this plotting here, let me show you the plot first and discuss.
And then I'll go back and show some of the code okay.
So here we see the cosine similarity between pineapple and pizza and the horizontal.
Let me I should make these a little bit bigger.
Where is that.
Yeah okay.
That's here I think I will make these a little bit longer and I'll make this a little bit thicker.
I don't want to make it too thick and too big.
Yeah.
It kind of crosses out the line.
Okay, maybe I regret doing that.
Maybe.
How about let's leave the line a little bit thinner, but wider.
Okay.
This is a little bit better.
So this horizontal black line shows exactly the same results that we got from exercise two all the way
up here.
The green squares over here.
This is the cosine similarity between pineapple and pizza from the clean model.
And that is exactly what you see with these horizontal black lines over here.
And then each of these circles shows cosine similarity between exactly the same two token embeddings
vectors.
So pineapple and pizza.
But each dot corresponds to manipulating one of the heads.
How many heads are there in this model there are 20 heads in total, so there are 20 circles in each
of these plots here.
Now you don't, except for for this over here in the very, very beginning here, you don't really see
20 different circles.
It looks like, you know, these are just little UFOs flying all over the sky.
And why is that the case?
Why does it look like there's really only one?
Well, that's because the effect of manipulating any one attention head is really, really small.
So all of these are bunched together.
This manipulation is so subtle that it's really not having much of an effect, and you see that as well
here when I do the t tests.
So again, what I'm testing here, let me show you this in the code.
I'm running a t test on the manipulated cosine similarities with minus the clean cosine similarities.
So it's testing for whether there is any consistent difference in the 20 dots compared to the black
lines.
And it's not surprising that that t test is really almost never significant.
It is a few times, honestly, these might just be statistical errors because I'm actually not correcting
for multiple comparisons over here.
Maybe I should let me do this quick and dirty.
So there's 36 layers and then we see every single one of those.
Apparently.
So Speciously significant results just disappeared.
So what this tells us is that this manipulation, this really precise manipulation of one head for one
layer and one token that does not have any consistent impact on the cosine similarity between pineapple
and pizza.
So that relationship is really, really strong in GPT two.
We're going to need like a jackhammer to change the way that GPT two associates pineapple with pizza.
So far in this part of the course, you have seen that there are multiple scales or levels of precision
at which you can target these models for interference.
You can get really detailed, precise, targeted interventions like what you saw here.
And you can also do much more macroscopic manipulations, like scaling down an entire transformer block
output.
Now, none of these approaches is intrinsically better or worse.
They can be used to evaluate different kinds of hypotheses about different kinds of calculations and
representations inside the model.
I think a promising future approach of mechanistic interpretability will be to combine these different
kinds of manipulations and different levels of granularity to test very specific hypotheses.
Of course, I would also like to stress again, that the appropriate learning point from this code challenge
is about the implementation of the methodological approach, and not the ridiculous interpretations
of the findings.
Of course, there was only one sentence.
That's really not enough data to draw any strong conclusions.
That said, we can definitely conclude that peanut butter and pineapple are fantastic on pizza.
I think I will move to Italy and open up a pizzeria.